Measurement invariance (MI) is mainly described as a psychometric property for valid group comparisons in psychological research, despite recent reviews demonstrating its neglect in practice (Putnick & Bornstein, 2016). Indeed, the standard approach to investigate MI, multi-group confirmatory factor analysis (MG-CFA), reduces invariance testing to comparisons of increasingly restrictive nested statistical models (Millsap & Olivera-Aguilar, 2012; Sterner, De Roover, et al., 2024). If then invariance is detected, researchers face multiple options, such as avoiding group comparisons, aiming for partial invariance strategies, or proceeding with comparisons even if unwarranted (Leitgöb et al., 2023). Hence, the conceptualization of MI as solely a statistical prerequisite inadvertently positions MI as a hurdle rather than a substantive research question, potentially contributing to the aforementioned neglect.

Recent literature addresses this by integrating causal inference perspectives into MI research. Indeed, Sterner et al. (2024) demonstrate how a frequentist-based moderated nonlinear factor analysis (MNLFA) may be employed within a causal framework to investigate sources of non-invariance. Crucially, by incorporating directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) to make causal assumptions explicit, Sterner et al. (2024) provide researchers with tools to generate and test hypotheses about *why* MI fails to hold. However, Sterner et al. (2024) focused exclusively on observed variables as potential causes of non-invariance. While this represents an important first step, many theoretical questions in psychology concern latent constructs as causal mechanisms. For instance, acquiescence bias might influence how individuals answer to test items. The present thesis extends the (conceptual and statistical) discussion presented in Sterner et al. (2024) by incorporating latent variables as potential causes of measurement non-invariance. For that, we use a recently proposed Bayesian MNLFA. that enables researchers to model latent causes of non-invariance.
